-   [BRAKER2 User Guide](#braker2-user-guide)
    -   [Authors and Contact
        Information](#authors-and-contact-information)
-   [Introduction](#introduction)
    -   [What is BRAKER2?](#what-is-braker2)
    -   [Keys to successful gene
        prediction](#keys-to-successful-gene-prediction)
    -   [Overview of modes for running
        BRAKER2](#overview-of-modes-for-running-braker2)
-   [Installation](#installation)
    -   [Supported software versions](#supported-software-versions)
    -   [BRAKER2](#braker2)
        -   [Perl pipeline dependencies](#perl-pipeline-dependencies)
        -   [BRAKER2 components](#braker2-components)
    -   [Bioinformatics software
        dependencies](#bioinformatics-software-dependencies)
        -   [Mandatory tools](#mandatory-tools)
        -   [Optional tools](#optional-tools)
-   [Running BRAKER2](#running-braker2)
    -   [Different BRAKER2 pipeline
        modes](#different-braker2-pipeline-modes)
        -   [BRAKER2 with RNA-Seq data (only)](#braker1)
        -   [BRAKER2 with proteins of longer evolutionary
            distance](#braker2-with-proteins-of-longer-evolutionary-distance)
        -   [BRAKER2 with proteins of shorter evolutionary
            distance](#prot-in)
        -   [BRAKER2 with RNA-Seq and protein
            data](#braker2-with-rna-seq-and-protein-data)
    -   [Description of selected BRAKER2 command line options](#options)
        -   [–ab\_initio](#ab_initio)
        -   [–augustus\_args=–some\_arg=bla](#augustus_argssome_argbla)
        -   [–cores=INT](#coresint)
        -   [–fungus](#fungus)
        -   [–softmasking](#softmasking)
        -   [–useexisting](#useexisting)
        -   [–crf](#crf)
        -   [–lambda=int](#lambdaint)
        -   [–UTR=on](#utron)
        -   [–stranded=+,-,.,...](#stranded-....)
-   [Output of BRAKER2](#output-of-braker2)
-   [Example data](#example-data)
    -   [Data description](#data-description)
    -   [Testing BRAKER2 with RNA-Seq (only) data
        (`test1.sh`)](#testing-braker2-with-rna-seq-only-data-test1.sh)
    -   [Testing BRAKER2 with hints from proteins of remote homology
        (only)
        (`test2.sh`)](#testing-braker2-with-hints-from-proteins-of-remote-homology-only-test2.sh)
    -   [Testing BRAKER2 with hints from proteins of remote homology and
        RNA-Seq
        (`test3.sh`)](#testing-braker2-with-hints-from-proteins-of-remote-homology-and-rna-seq-test3.sh)
    -   [Testing BRAKER2 with proteins of close homology (only)
        (`test4.sh`)](#testing-braker2-with-proteins-of-close-homology-only-test4.sh)
    -   [Testing BRAKER2 with proteins of close homology and RNA-Seq
        data (RNA-Seq supported training)
        (`test5.sh`)](#testing-braker2-with-proteins-of-close-homology-and-rna-seq-data-rna-seq-supported-training-test5.sh)
    -   [Testing BRAKER2 with proteins of close homoogy and RNA-Seq data
        (RNA-Seq and protein supported training)
        (`test6.sh`](#testing-braker2-with-proteins-of-close-homoogy-and-rna-seq-data-rna-seq-and-protein-supported-training-test6.sh)
    -   [Testing BRAKER2 with pre-trained parameters (prediction only)
        (`test7.sh`)](#testing-braker2-with-pre-trained-parameters-prediction-only-test7.sh)
    -   [Testing BRAKER2 with genome sequence, only
        (`text8.sh`)](#testing-braker2-with-genome-sequence-only-text8.sh)
-   [Bug reporting](#bug-reporting)
    -   [Reporting bugs on github](#reporting-bugs-on-github)
    -   [Common problems](#commonproblems)
-   [Citing BRAKER2 and software called by
    BRAKER2](#citing-braker2-and-software-called-by-braker2)
-   [Licence](#licence)

BRAKER2 User Guide
==================

Authors and Contact Information
-------------------------------

Katharina J. Hoff ([](mailto:katharina.hoff@uni-greifswald.de)), Simone
Lange, Alexandre Lomsadze, Mark Borodovsky, Mario Stanke

bibliography: - ‘refs.bib’ title: BRAKER2 User Guide —

If you are viewing this file as README.md, figures will not displayed,
properly. We recommend viewing the file docs/userguide.pdf.

Introduction
============

What is BRAKER2?
----------------

The rapidly growing number of sequenced genomes requires fully automated
methods for accurate gene structure annotation. With this goal in mind,
we have developed BRAKER1 (Hoff et al. 2015), a combination of
GeneMark-ET (Lomsadze, Burns, and Borodovsky 2014) and AUGUSTUS (Stanke
et al. 2008; Stanke et al. 2006), that uses genomic and RNA-Seq data to
automatically generate full gene structure annotations in novel genomes.

However, the quality of RNA-Seq data that is available for annotating a
novel genome is variable, and in some cases, RNA-Seq data is not
available, at all.

BRAKER2 is an extension of BRAKER1 which allows for **fully automated
training** of the gene prediction tools GeneMark-EX (Lomsadze et al.
2005; Ter-Hovhannisyan et al. 2008; Lomsadze, Burns, and Borodovsky
2014)[^1] and AUGUSTUS from RNA-Seq and/or protein homology information,
and that integrates the extrinsic evidence from RNA-Seq and protein
homology information into the **prediction**.

In contrast to other available methods that rely on protein homology
information, BRAKER2 reaches high gene prediction accuracy even in the
absence of the annotation of very closely related species and in the
absence of RNA-Seq data.

BRAKER2 can also combine RNA-Seq and protein homology information.

Keys to successful gene prediction
----------------------------------

-   Use a high quality genome assembly. If you have a huge number of
    very short scaffolds in your genome assembly, those short scaffolds
    will likely increase runtime dramatically but will not increase
    prediction accuracy.

-   Use simple scaffold names in the genome file (e.g. `>contig1` will
    work better than
    `>contig1my custom species namesome putative function /more/information/  and lots of special characters %&!*(){}`).
    Make the scaffold names in all your fasta files simple before
    running any alignment program.

-   In order to predict genes accurately in a novel genome, the genome
    should be masked for repeats. This will avoid the prediction of
    false positive gene structures in repetitive and low complexitiy
    regions. Repeat masking is also essential for mapping RNA-Seq data
    to a genome. In case of GeneMark-EX and AUGUSTUS, softmasking
    (i.e. putting repeat regions into lower case letters and all other
    regions into upper case letters) leads to better results than
    hardmasking (i.e. replacing letters in repetitive regions by the
    letter `N` for unknown nucleotide). If the genome is masked, use the
    `–softmasking` flag of `braker.pl`.

-   Many genomes have gene structures that will be predicted accurately
    with standard parameters of GeneMark-EX and AUGUSTUS within BRAKER2.
    However, some genomes have clade-specific features, i.e. special
    branch point model in fungi, or non-standard splice-site patterns.
    Please read the options section \[options\] in order to determine
    whether any of the custom options may improve gene prediction
    accuracy in the genome of your target species.

-   Always check gene prediction results before further usage! You can
    e.g. use a genome browser for visual inspection of gene models in
    context with extrinsic evidence data.

Overview of modes for running BRAKER2
-------------------------------------

BRAKER2 mainly features semi-unsupervised, extrinsic evidence data
(RNA-Seq and/or protein spliced alignment information) supported
training of GeneMark-EX[^2] and subsequent training of AUGUSTUS with
integration of extrinsic evidence in the final gene prediction step.
However, there are now a number of additional pipelines included in
BRAKER2. In the following, we give an overview of possible input files
and pipelines:

-   genome file, only. In this mode, GeneMark-ES is trained on the
    genome sequence, alone. Long genes predicted by GeneMark-ES are
    selected for training AUGUSTUS. Final predictions by AUGUSTUS are
    *ab initio*. This approach will likely yield lower prediction
    accuracy than all other here described pipelines. (see figure
    \[braker-main-a\]),

    ![BRAKER pipeline A: training GeneMark-ES on genome data, only; *ab
    initio* gene prediction with
    AUGUSTUS.\[braker-main-a\]](docs/figs/braker-es.pdf)

-   genome and RNA-Seq file from the same species (see figure
    \[braker-main-b\]); this approach is suitable for RNA-Seq libraries
    with a good coverage of the transcriptome, **important:** this
    approach requires that each intron is covered by many alignments,
    i.e. it does not work with assembled transcriptome mappings,

    ![BRAKER pipeline B: training GeneMark-ET supported by RNA-Seq
    spliced alignment information, prediction with AUGUSTUS with that
    same spliced alignment
    information.\[braker-main-b\]](docs/figs/braker1.pdf)

-   genome file and database of proteins that may be of longer
    evolutionary distance to the target species (see figure
    \[braker-main-c\]); this approach is suitable if no RNA-Seq data is
    available, and if no protein data from a very closely related
    species is available, **important:** this approach requires a
    database of protein families, i.e. many representatives of each
    protein family must be present in the database, please contact
    Alexandre Lomsadze for information about the required external
    GaTech protein mapping pipeline,

    ![BRAKER pipeline C: training GeneMark-EP on protein spliced
    alignment information, prediction with AUGUSTUS with that same
    spliced alignment information. Proteins used here can be of longer
    evolutionary distance.\[braker-main-c\]](./docs/figs/braker2_ep.pdf)

-   genome and RNA-Seq file from the same species, and proteins that may
    be of longer evolutionary distance to the target species (see figure
    \[braker-main-d\]); **important:** this approach requires a database
    of protein families, i.e. many representatives of each protein
    family must be present in the database,

    ![BRAKER pipeline D: training GeneMark-ETP supported by RNA-Seq
    alignment information and protein spliced alignment information
    (proteins can be of longer evolutionary distance), prediction with
    AUGUSTUS using the same alignment information. Introns supported by
    both RNA-Seq and protein alignment information are treated as “true
    positive introns”, their prediction in gene structures by
    GeneMark-ETP and AUGUSTUS is
    enforced.\[braker-main-d\]](./docs/figs/braker2_ep_rnaseq.pdf)

-   genome file and file with proteins of short evolutionary distance
    (see figure \[braker2-sidetrack-b\]); this approach is suitable if
    RNA-Seq data is not available and if the reference species is very
    closely related,

    ![Additional pipeline B: training AUGUSTUS on the basis of spliced
    alignment information from proteins of a very closely related
    species against the target
    genome.\[braker2-sidetrack-b\]](./docs/figs/braker2_gth.pdf)

-   genome and RNA-Seq file and proteins of short evolutionary distance
    (see figures \[braker2-sidetrack-a\] and \[braker2-sidetrack-c\]).
    In both cases, GeneMark-ET is trained supported by RNA-Seq data, and
    the resulting gene predictions are used for training AUGUSTUS. In
    approach A), protein alignment information is used in the gene
    prediction step with AUGUSTUS, only. In approach C), protein spliced
    alignment data is used to complement the training set for AUGUSTUS.
    The latter approach is in particular suitable if RNA-Seq data does
    not produce a sufficiently high number of training gene structures
    for AUGUSTUS, and if a very closely related and already annotated
    species is available.

    ![Additional pipeline A: training GeneMark-ET supported by RNA-Seq
    spliced alignment information, prediction with AUGUSTUS with spliced
    alignment information from RNA-Seq data and with gene features
    determined by alignments from proteins of a very closely related
    species against the target
    genome.\[braker2-sidetrack-a\]](./docs/figs/braker2.pdf)

    ![Additional pipeline C: training GeneMark-ET on the basis of
    RNA-Seq spliced alignment information, training AUGUSTUS on a set of
    training gene structures compiled from RNA-Seq supported gene
    structures predicted by GeneMark-ET and spliced alignment of
    proteins of a very closely related
    species.\[braker2-sidetrack-c\]](./docs/figs/braker2_train_from_both.pdf)

Installation
============

Supported software versions
---------------------------

At the time of release, this BRAKER2 version was tested with:

-   AUGUSTUS 3.3.1[^3]

-   GeneMark-ET 4.33

-   BAMTOOLS 2.5.1 (Barnett et al. 2011)

-   SAMTOOLS 1.7-4-g93586ed (Li et al. 2009)

-   GenomeThreader 1.7.0 (Gremme 2013)

-   (Spaln 2.3.1 (Gotoh 2008b; Gotoh 2008a; Iwata and Gotoh 2012))[^4]

-   (Exonerate 2.2.0 (Slater and Birney 2005))[^5]

-   NCBI BLAST+ 2.2.31+ (Altschul et al. 1990;
    [**???**]{.citeproc-not-found data-reference-id="camacho2009blast"}
    +)

BRAKER2
-------

### Perl pipeline dependencies

Running BRAKER2 requires a Linux-system with `bash` and Perl.
Furthermore, BRAKER2 requires the following CPAN-Perl modules to be
installed:

-   `File::Spec::Functions`

-   `Hash::Merge`

-   `List::Util`

-   `Logger::Simple`

-   `Module::Load::Conditional`

-   `Parallel::ForkManager`

-   `POSIX`

-   `Scalar::Util::Numeric`

-   `YAML`

On Ubuntu, for example, install the modules with CPANminus[^6]:
`sudo cpanm Module::Name`, e.g. `sudo cpanm Hash::Merge`.

BRAKER2 also uses a Perl module `helpMod.pm` that is not available on
CPAN. This module is part of the BRAKER2 release and does not require
separate installation.

### BRAKER2 components

BRAKER2 is a collection of Perl scripts and a Perl module. The main
script that will be called in order to run BRAKER2 is `braker.pl`.
Additional Perl components are:

-   `align2hints.pl`

-   `filterGenemark.pl`

-   `filterIntronsFindStrand.pl`

-   `startAlign.pl`

-   `helpMod.pm`

-   `findGenesInIntrons.pl`

-   `downsample_traingenes.pl`

All Perl scripts (files ending with `*.pl`) that are part of BRAKER2
must be executable in order to run BRAKER2. This should already be the
case if you download BRAKER2 from our website. Executability may be
overwritten if you e.g. transfer BRAKER2 on a USB-stick to anothre
computer. In order to check whether required files are executable, run
the following command in the directory that contains BRAKER2 Perl
scripts:

    ls -l *.pl

The output should be similar to this:

    -rwxr-xr-x 1 katharina katharina  18191 Mai  7 10:25 align2hints.pl
    -rwxr-xr-x 1 katharina katharina 408782 Aug 17 18:24 braker.pl
    -rwxr-xr-x 1 katharina katharina   5024 Mai  7 10:25 downsample_traingenes.pl
    -rwxr-xr-x 1 katharina katharina  30453 Mai  7 10:25 filterGenemark.pl
    -rwxr-xr-x 1 katharina katharina   5754 Mai  7 10:25 filterIntronsFindStrand.pl
    -rwxr-xr-x 1 katharina katharina   7765 Mai  7 10:25 findGenesInIntrons.pl
    -rwxr-xr-x 1 katharina katharina  41674 Mai  7 10:25 startAlign.pl

It is important that the `x` in `-rwxr-xr-x` is present for each script.
If that is not the case, run

    chmod a+x *.pl

in order to change file attributes.

You may find it helpful to add the directory in which BRAKER2 perl
scripts reside to your `$PATH` environment variable. For a single bash
session, enter:

    PATH=/your_path_to_braker/:$PATH
    export PATH
        

To make this `$PATH` modification available to all bash sessions, add
the above lines to a startup script (e.g.`\sim/.bashrc`).

Bioinformatics software dependencies
------------------------------------

BRAKER2 calls upon various bioinformatics software tools that are not
part of BRAKER2. Some tools are obligatory, i.e. BRAKER2 will not run at
all if these tools are not present on your system. Other tools are
optional. Please install all tools that are required for running BRAKER2
in the mode of your choice.

### Mandatory tools

#### GeneMark-EX

Download GeneMark-EX[^7] from
<http://exon.gatech.edu/GeneMark/license_download.cgi>. Unpack and
install GeneMark-EX as described in GeneMark-EX’s `README` file.

If already contained in your `$PATH` variable, BRAKER2 will guess the
location of `gmes_petap.pl`, automatically. Otherwise, BRAKER2 can find
GeneMark-EX executables either by locating them in an environment
variable `GENEMARK_PATH`, or by taking a command line argument\
(`–GENEMARK_PATH=/your_path_to_GeneMark-EX/gmes_petap/`).

In order to set the environment variable for your current Bash session,
type:

    export GENEMARK_PATH=/your_path_to_GeneMark-ET/gmes_petap/

Add the above lines to a startup script (e.g. `\sim/.bashrc`) in order
to make it available to all bash sessions.[^8]

#### AUGUSTUS

Download AUGUSTUS from <https://github.com/Gaius-Augustus/Augustus>.
Unpack AUGUSTUS and install AUGUSTUS according to AUGUSTUS `README.TXT`.

You should compile AUGUSTUS on your own system in order to avoid
problems with versions of libraries used by AUGUSTUS. Compilation
instructions are provided in the AUGUSTUS `README.TXT` file
(`Augustus/README.txt`).

AUGUSTUS consists of `augustus`, the gene prediction tool, additional
C++ tools located in\
`augustus/auxprogs` and Perl scripts located in `augustus/scripts`. Perl
scripts must be executable (see instructions in section
\[#braker2-components\].

The C++ tool `bam2hints` is an essential component of BRAKER2. Sources
are located in\
`Augustus/auxprogs/bam2hints`. Make sure that you compile `bam2hints` on
your system (it should be automatically compiled when AUGUSTUS is
compiled, but in case of problems with `bam2hints`, please read
troubleshooting instructions in `Augustus/auxprogs/bam2hints/README`).

If you would like to train UTR parameters and integrate RNA-Seq coverage
information into gene prediction with BRAKER2 (which is possible only if
an RNA-Seq bam-file is provided as extrinsic evidence), `utrrnaseq` and
`bam2wig` in the `auxprogs` directory are also required. If compilation
with the default `Makefile` fails, please read troubleshooting
instructions in `Augustus/auxprogs/bam2wig/README.txt` and
`Augustus/auxprogs/utrrnaseq/README`, respectively.

Since BRAKER2 is a pipeline that trains AUGUSTUS, i.e. writes species
specific parameter files, BRAKER2 needs writing access to the
configuration directory of AUGUSTUS that contains such files
(`Augustus/config/`). If you install AUGUSTUS globally on your system,
the `config` folder will typically not be writable by all users. Either
make the directory where `config` resides recursively writable to users
of AUGUSTUS, or copy the `config/` folder (recursively) to a location
where users have writing permission.

AUGUSTUS will locate the `config` folder by looking for an environment
variable `$AUGUSTUS_CONFIG_PATH`. If the `$AUGUSTUS_CONFIG_PATH`
environment variable is not set, then BRAKER2 will look in the path
`../config` relative to the directory in which it finds an AUGUSTUS
executable. Alternatively, you can supply the variable as a command line
argument to BRAKER2\
(`–AUGUSTUS_CONFIG_PATH=/your_path_to_AUGUSTUS/augustus/config/`). We
recommend that you export the variable e.g. for your current bash
session:

    export AUGUSTUS_CONFIG_PATH=/your_path_to_AUGUSTUS/augustus/config/
        

In order to make the variable available to all Bash sessions, add the
above line to a startup script, e.g. `\sim/.bashrc`.

##### Important:

BRAKER2 expects the entire `config` directory of AUGUSTUS at
`$AUGUSTUS_CONFIG_PATH`, i.e. the subfolders `species` with its contents
(at least `generic`) and `extrinsic`! Providing an writable but empty
folder at `$AUGUSTUS_CONFIG_PATH` will not work for BRAKER. If you need
to separate augustus binary and `$AUGUSTUS_CONFIG_PATH`, we recommend
that you recursively copy the un-writable config contents to a writable
location.

You have a system-wide installation of AUGUSTUS at `/usr/bin/augustus`,
an unwritable copy of `config` sits at `/usr/bin/augustus_config/`. The
folder `/home/yours/` is writable to you. Copy with the following
command (and additionally set the then required variables):\
cp -r \\texttt{/usr/bin/augustus\_config/ /home/yours/ export
AUGUSTUS\_CONFIG\_PATH=/home/yours/augustus\_config export
AUGUSTUS\_BIN\_PATH=/usr/bin export
AUGUSTUS\_SCRIPTS\_PATH=/usr/bin/augustus\_scripts

##### Modification of \$PATH.

Adding adding directories of AUGUSTUS binaries and scripts to your
`$PATH` variable enables your system to locate these tools,
automatically. It is not a requirement for running BRAKER2 to do this,
because BRAKER2 will try to guess them from the location of another
environment variable (`$AUGUSTUS_CONFIG_PATH`), or both directories can
be supplied as command line arguments to `braker.pl`, but we recommend
to add them to your `$PATH` variable. For your current bash session,
type:

    PATH=:/your_path_to_augustus/bin/:/your_path_to_augustus/scripts/:$PATH
    export PATH
        

For all your BASH sessions, add the above lines to a startup script
(e.g.`\sim/.bashrc`).

#### Bamtools

Download BAMTOOLS
(e.g. `git clone https://github.com/pezmaster31/bamtools.git`). Install
BAMTOOLS by typing the following in your shell:\
cd your-bamtools-directory mkdir build cd build cmake .. make

If already in your `$PATH` variable, BRAKER2 will find bamtools,
automatically. Otherwise, BRAKER2 can locate the bamtools binary either
by using an environment variable `$BAMTOOLS_PATH`, or by taking a
command line argument
(`–BAMTOOLS_PATH=/your_path_to_bamtools/bin/`[^9]). In order to set the
environment variable e.g. for your current bash session, type:

    export BAMTOOLS_PATH=/your_path_to_bamtools/bin/ 
        

Add the above line to a startup script (e.g. `\sim/.bashrc`) in order to
set the environment variable for all bash sessions.

#### NCBI BLAST+

On Ubuntu, install with `sudo apt-get install ncbi-blast+`.

If already in your `$PATH` variable, BRAKER2 will find blastp,
automatically. Otherwise, BRAKER2 can locate the blastp binary either by
using an environment variable `$BLAST_PATH`, or by taking a command line
argument (`–BLAST_PATH=/your_path_to_blast/`). In order to set the
environment variable e.g. for your current bash session, type:

    export BLAST_PATH=/your_path_to_blast/ 
        

Add the above line to a startup script (e.g. `\sim/.bashrc`) in order to
set the environment variable for all bash sessions.

### Optional tools

#### Samtools

Samtools is not required for running BRAKER2 if all your files are
formatted, correctly (i.e. all sequences should have short and unique
fasta names). If you are not sure whether all your files are fomatted
correctly, it might be helpful to have Samtools installed because
BRAKER2 can automatically fix certain format issues by using Samtools.

As a prerequisite for Samtools, download and install `htslib` (e.g. 
`git clone https://github.com/samtools/htslib.git`, follow the `htslib`
documentation for installation).

Download and install Samtools (e.g.
`git clone git://github.com/samtools/samtools.git`), subsequently follow
Samtools documentation for installation).

If already in your `$PATH` variable, BRAKER2 will find samtools,
automatically. Otherwise, BRAKER2 can find Samtools either by taking a
command line argument\
(`–SAMTOOLS_PATH=/your_path_to_samtools/`), or by using an environment
variable `$SAMTOOLS_PATH`. For exporting the variable, e.g. for your
current bash session, type:

    export SAMTOOLS_PATH=/your_path_to_samtools/
        

Add the above line to a startup script (e.g. `\sim/.bashrc`) in order to
set the environment variable for all bash sessions.

#### Python3 & Biopython

If Python3 and Biopython are installed, BRAKER2 can generate FASTA-files
with coding sequences and protein sequences predicted by AUGUSTUS. This
is an optional step, it can be disabled with the command-line flag
`--skipGetAnnoFromFasta`; Python3 and Biopython are not required if this
flag is set.

On Ubuntu, Python3 is installed by default. Install the Python3 package
manager with:

    sudo apt-get install python3-pip

Subsequently, install Biopython with:

    sudo pip3 install biopython

On Ubuntu, python3 will be in your \$PATH variable, by default, and
BRAKER2 will automatically locate it. However, you have the option to
specify the `python3` binary location in two other ways:

1.  Export an environment variable `$PYTHON3_PATH`, e.g. in your
    `\sim/.bashrc` file:

        export PYTHON3_PATH=/path/to/python3/

2.  Specify the command line option `--PYTHON3_PATH=/path/to/python3/`
    to `braker.pl`.

#### GenomeThreader

This tool is required, only, if you would like to run protein to genome
alignments with BRAKER2 using GenomeThreader. This is a suitable
approach if an annotated species of short evolutionary distance to your
target genome is available. Download GenomeThreader from
<http://genomethreader.org/>. Unpack and install according to
`gth/README`.

BRAKER2 will try to locate the GenomeThreader executable by using an
environment variable\
`$ALIGNMENT_TOOL_PATH`. Alternatively, this can be supplied as command
line argument\
(`–ALIGNMENT_TOOL_PATH=/your/path/to/gth`).

#### Spaln

This tool is required, only, if you would like to run protein to genome
alignments with BRAKER2 using Spaln. This is a suitable approach if an
annotated species of short evolutionary distance to your target genome
is available. (We recommend the usage of GenomeThreader instad of
Spaln.) Download Spaln from
<https://github.com/ogotoh/spaln/releases>. Unpack and install
according to `spaln/doc/SpalnReadMe22.pdf`.

BRAKER2 will try to locate the Spaln executable by using an environment
variable `$ALIGNMENT_TOOL_PATH`. Alternatively, this can be supplied as
command line argument\
(`–ALIGNMENT_TOOL_PATH=/your/path/to/spaln`).

#### Exonerate

This tool is required, only, if you would like to run protein to genome
alignments with BRAKER2 using Exonerate. This is a suitable approach if
an annotated species of short evolutionary distance to your target
genome is available. (We recommend the usage of GenomeThreader instad of
Exonerate because Exonerate is comparably slower and has lower
specificity than GenomeThreader.) Download Exonerate from
<https://github.com/nathanweeks/exonerate>. Unpack and install according
to `exonerate/README`. (On Ubuntu, download and install by typing
`sudo apt-get install exonerate`.)

BRAKER2 will try to locate the Exonerate executable by using an
environment variable\
`$ALIGNMENT_TOOL_PATH`. Alternatively, this can be supplied as command
line argument\
(`–ALIGNMENT_TOOL_PATH=/your/path/to/exonerate`).

Running BRAKER2
===============

Different BRAKER2 pipeline modes
--------------------------------

In the following, we describe “typical” BRAKER2 calls for different
input data types. In general, we recommend that you run BRAKER2 on
genomic sequences that have been softmasked for Repeats. If your genome
has been softmasked, include the `–softmasking` flag in your BRAKER2
call!

### BRAKER2 with RNA-Seq data (only) {#braker1}

.

This approach is suitable for genomes of species for which RNA-Seq
libraries with a good coverage of the transcriptome are available. The
pipeline is illustrated in figure \[braker-main-b\].

BRAKER2 can either extract RNA-Seq spliced alignment information from
`bam` files, or it can use such extracted information, directly.

In order to run BRAKER2 with RNA-Seq data supplied as `bam` file(s) (in
case of multiple files, separate them by comma), run:

    braker.pl --species=yourSpecies --genome=genome.fasta \\
       --bam=file1.bam,file2.bam

In order to run BRAKER2 with RNA-Seq spliced alignment information that
has already been extracted, run:

    braker.pl --species=yourSpecies --genome=genome.fasta \
       --hints=hints1.gff,hints2.gff

The format of such a hints file must be as follows (tabulator separated
file):

    chrName b2h intron  6591    8003    1   +   .   pri=4;src=E
    chrName b2h intron  6136    9084    11  +   .   mult=11;pri=4;src=E
    ...

The source `b2h` in the second column and the source tag `src=E` in the
last column are essential for BRAKER2 to determine whether a hint has
been generated from RNA-Seq data.

#### Training and prediction of UTRs, integration of coverage information

If RNA-Seq (and only RNA-Seq) data is provided to BRAKER2 as a bam-file,
and if the genome is softmasked for repeats, BRAKER2 can automatically
train UTR parameters for AUGUSTUS. After successful training of UTR
parameters, BRAKER2 will automatically predict genes including coverage
information form RNA-Seq data. Example call:

    braker.pl --species=yourSpecies --genome=genome.fasta \
       --bam=file.bam --softmasking --UTR=on

#### Stranded RNA-Seq alignments

For running BRAKER2 without UTR paramters, it is not very important
whether RNA-Seq data was generated by a *stranded* protocol (because
spliced alignments are ’artificially stranded’ by checking the splice
site pattern). However, for UTR training and prediction, stranded
libraries may provide information that is valuable for BRAKER2.

After alignment of the stranded RNA-Seq libraries, separate the
resulting bam file entries into two files: one for plus strand mappings,
one for minus strand mappings. Call BRAKER2 as follows:

    braker.pl --species=yourSpecies --genome=genome.fasta \
       --softmasking --bam=plus.bam,minus.bam --stranded=+,- \
        --UTR=on

You may additionally include bam files from unstranded libraries. Those
files will not used for generating UTR training examples, but they will
be included in the final gene prediction step as unstranded coverage
information, example call:

    braker.pl --species=yourSpecies --genome=genome.fasta \
       --softmasking --bam=plus.bam,minus.bam,unstranded.bam \
       --stranded=+,-,. --UTR=on

### BRAKER2 with proteins of longer evolutionary distance

This approach is suitable for genomes of species for which no RNA-Seq
libraries are available and for which no closely related and well
annotated genome is available. A database of proteins with longer
evolutionary distance to the target species may be used in this case.
The pipeline is illustrated in figure \[gatech\].

![Protein mapping pipeline for proteins of longer evolutionary
distance.\[gatech\]](./docs/figs/gatech-prot-pipeline.pdf)

Running BRAKER2 with proteins of longer evolutionary distance requires
the preparation of “protein hints” before running BRAKER2, itself.
Preparing protein hints is in this case not part of BRAKER2 because in
contrast to BRAKER2, which can run on a work station with one or
multiple cores, the GeneMark-EP specific protein mapping pipeline
requires a cluster for execution. Please contact Alexandre Lomsadze for
more information about the protein mapping pipeline.

For running BRAKER2 in this mode, type:

    braker.pl --species=yourSpecies --genome=genome.fasta \

The format of such a hints file must be as follows (tabulator separated
file):

    chrName ProSplign   intron  6591    8003    5   +   .   mult=5;pri=4;src=P
    chrName ProSplign   intron  6136    9084    11  +   .   mult=11;pri=4;src=P
    ...

The source `ProSplign` in the second column and the source tag `src=P`
in the last column are essential for BRAKER2 to determine whether a hint
has been generated from remote homology protein data.

### BRAKER2 with proteins of shorter evolutionary distance {#prot-in}

This approach is suitable if RNA-Seq data for the species of the target
genome is not available and if a well annotated and very closely related
reference species is available. The pipeline is illustrated in figure
\[braker2-sidetrack-b\]

For running BRAKER2 in this mode, type:

    braker.pl --species=yourSpecies --genome=genome.fasta \
       --prot_seq=proteins.fa --prg=gth \
       --ALIGNMENT_TOOL_PATH=/path/to/gth/binary \
       --trainFromGth

It is possible to generate protein alignments externally, prior running
BRAKER2, itself. The compatible command for running GenomeThreader prior
running BRAKER2, is:

    gth -genomic genome.fa  -protein protein.fa -gff3out \
       -skipalignmentout -o gth.aln

In order to use such externally created alignment files, run:

    braker.pl --species=yourSpecies --genome=genome.fasta \
       --prot_aln=proteins.aln --prg=gth --trainFromGth

It is also possible to run BRAKER2 in this mode using an already
prepared hints file. In this case, run:

    braker.pl --species=yourSpecies --genome=genome.fasta \
       --hints=hints.gff --prg=gth --trainFromGth

Format of the hints file should look like this:

    chrName   gth2h   CDSpart 105984  106633  .     -    .    src=P;grp=FBpp0285205;pri=4
    chrName   gth2h   start   106646  106648  .     -    .    src=P;grp=FBpp0285205;pri=4

Supported features are intron, CDSpart, start, stop.

### BRAKER2 with RNA-Seq and protein data

BRAKER2 with RNA-Seq and protein data is currently still under
development. BRAKER2 currently does not train GeneMark-EX from protein
and RNA-Seq data, yet. However, if RNA-Seq data of the target species
and protein data of a very closely related reference species are
available, BRAKER2 already supports the following to modes.

#### Adding protein data of short evolutionary distance to gene prediction step

This pipeline is illustrated in figure \[braker2-sidetrack-a\].

In general, add the options

       --prot_seq=proteins.fa --prg=(gth|exonerate|spaln)

to the BRAKER2 call that is described in section \[braker1\]. Select one
protein alignment tool from GenomeThreader (`gth`, recommended), Spaln
(`spaln`) or Exonerate (`exonerate`). Of course, you may also specify
the protein information as protein alignment files or hints files as
described in section \[prot-in\]). This may result in a call similar to:

    braker.pl --species=yourSpecies --genome=genome.fasta \
       --bam=file1.bam,file2.bam --prot_seq=proteins.fa \
       --prg=(gth|exonerate|spaln)

#### Extending training gene set with proteins of short evolutionary distance

If the number of training gene structures identified by RNA-Seq data,
only, seems to be too small, you may add training gene structures
generated by protein alignments with GenomeThreader to the training gene
set. This pipeline is illustrated in \[braker2-sidetrack-c\].

In general, add the options

       --prot_seq=proteins.fa --prg=gth --gth2traingenes

to the BRAKER2 call that is described in section \[braker1\]. This may
result in a call similar to:

    braker.pl --species=yourSpecies --genome=genome.fasta \
       --bam=file1.bam,file2.bam --prot_seq=proteins.fa \
       --prg=gth --gth2traingenes

Description of selected BRAKER2 command line options {#options}
----------------------------------------------------

Please run `braker.pl –help` to obtain a full list of options.

### –ab\_initio

Compute AUGUSTUS *ab initio* predictions in addition to AUGUSTUS
predictions with hints (additional output files: `augustus.ab_initio.*`.
This may be useful for estimating the quality of training gene
parameters when inspecting predictions in a Browser.

### –augustus\_args=–some\_arg=bla

One or several command line arguments to be passed to AUGUSTUS, if
several arguments are given, separated by whitespace,
i.e. `–first_arg=sth –second_arg=sth`. This may be be useful if you know
that gene prediction in your particular species benefits from a
particular AUGUSTUS argument during the prediction step.

### –cores=INT

Specifies the maximum number of cores that can be used during
computation. BRAKER2 has to run some steps on a single core, others can
take advantage of multiple cores. The optimal core number of all steps
is 8. If you use more than 8 cores, this will not speed up all
parallelized steps, in particular, the time consuming
`optimize_augustus.pl` will not use more than 8 cores. However, if you
don’t mind some cores being idle, using more than 8 cores will speed up
other steps.

### –fungus

GeneMark-EX option: run algorithm with branch point model. Use this
option if you genome is a fungus.

### –softmasking

Softmasking option for soft masked genome files. (Disabled by default.)

### –useexisting

Use the present config and parameter files if they exist for ’species’.
This step will skip training AUGUSTUS and instead use pre-trained
parameters.

### –crf

Execute CRF training for AUGUSTUS; resulting parameters are only kept
for final predictions if they show higher accuracy than HMM parameters.
This increases runtime!

### –lambda=int

Change the parameter $\lambda$ of the Poisson distribution that is used
for downsampling training genes according to their number of introns
(only genes with up to 5 introns are downsampled). The default value is
$\lambda=2$. You might want to set it to 0 for organisms that mainly
have single-exon genes. (Generally, single-exon genes contribute less
value to increasing AUGUSTUS parameters compared to genes with many
exons.)

### –UTR=on

Generate UTR training examples for AUGUSTUS from RNA-Seq coverage
information, train AUGUSTUS UTR parameters and predict genes with
AUGUSTUS and UTRs, including coverage information for RNA-Seq as
evidence. This flag only works if –softmasking is also enabled, and if
the only extrinsic evidence provided are bam files.

### –stranded=+,-,.,...

If `–UTR=on` is enabled, strand-separated bam-files can be provided with
`–bam=plus.bam,minus.bam`. In that case, `–stranded=...` should hold the
strands of the bam files (`+` for plus strand, `-` for minus strand, `.`
for unstranded). Note that unstranded data will be used in the gene
prediction step, only, if the parameter `–stranded=...` is set.

Output of BRAKER2
=================

BRAKER2 produces several important output files in the working
directory.

-   augustus.hints.gtf: Genes predicted by AUGUSTUS with intron hints
    from given extrinsic evidence. This file will be missing if BRAKER was run
    with the option `--esmode`.

-   augustus.hints_utr.gtf: Genes predicted by AUGUSTUS with UTR parameters
    and coverage information from RNA-Seq data in GTF-format. The file will
    only be present if BRAKER was run with the option `--UTR=on` and a RNA-Seq
    BAM-file.

-   augustus.ab_initio.gtf: Genes predicted by AUGUSTUS in *ab initio* mode in
    GTF-format. The file will always be present if AUGUSTUS has been run with
    the option `--esmode`. Otherwise, it will only be present if BRAKER was run
    with the option `--AUGUSTUS_ab_initio`.

-   augustus.ab_initio_utr.gtf: Genes predicted by AUGUSTUS with UTR
    parameters in *ab initio* mode in GTF-format. This file will only be
    present if BRAKER was executed with the options `--UTR=on` and a RNA-Seq
    BAM-file, and with the option `--AUGUSTUS_ab_initio`.

-   GeneMark-E*/genemark.gtf: Genes predicted by GeneMark-ES/ET in GTF-format.
    This file will be missing if BRAKER was executed with proteins of close
    homology and the option `--trainFromGth`.

-   hintsfile.gff: The extrinsic evidence data extracted from RNAseq.bam and/or
    protein data. The introns are used for training GeneMark-ES/ET, all
    features are used for predicting genes with AUGUSTUS. The file is in
    GFF-format.

AUGUSTUS output files may be present with the following name endings and
formats:

-   GTF-format is always produced.

-   GFF3-format is produced if the flat `--gff3` was specified to
    BRAKER2.

-   Coding sequences in FASTA-format are produced if the flag
    `--skipGetAnnoFromFasta` was not set.

-   Protein sequence files in FASTA-format are produced if the flag
    `--skipGetAnnoFromFasta` was not set.

For details about gtf format, see
<http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Software/formats/GFF/>. A GTF-format file
contains one line per predicted exon. Example:

    HS04636 AUGUSTUS initial   966 1017 . + 0 transcript_id "g1.1"; gene_id "g1";
    HS04636 AUGUSTUS internal 1818 1934 . + 2 transcript_id "g1.1"; gene_id "g1";

The columns (fields) contain:

    seqname source feature start end score strand frame transcript ID and gene ID

Example data
============

An incomplete example data set is contained in the directory
`BRAKER/example`. In order to complete the data set, please download the
RNA-Seq alignment file (134 MB) with `wget`:

    cd BRAKER/example
    wget http://bioinf.uni-greifswald.de/bioinf/braker/RNAseq.bam

The example data set was not compiled in order to achieve optimal
prediction accuracy, but in order to test pipeline components.

Data description
----------------

Data corresponds to *Drosophila melanogaster* chromosome 2R from flybase
release R5, first 12000000 nucleotides.

RNA-Seq alignments were obtained by mapping Illumina paired-end librariy
SRR023505 to the genome file using STAR with standard parameters (single
pass mapping).

Protein sequences from Drosophila ananassae release R1.05 were aligned
to the genome sequence of Drosophila melanogaster chromosome R2 using
GenomeThreader with parameters
`-gff3out -skipalignmentout -paralogs -prseedlength 20 -prhdist 2 -gcmincoverage 80 -prminmatchlen 20`.
Protein sequence records of mapped proteins were stored in proteins.fa.

For generating protein hints from proteins of longer evolutionary
distance, proteins from the eggNog database insect proportion were
aligned to `Drosophila melanogaster` genome using the GaTech protein
mapping pipline (excluding *Drosophila* species except for
*D. grimshawi*, *D. virilis*, *D. willistoni*, *D. pseudoobscura*,
*D. ananassae*).

List of files:

-   `genome.fa` - genome file in fasta format

-   `RNAseq.bam` - RNA-Seq alignment file in bam format (this file is
    not in github, it must be downloaded separately from
    <http://bioinf.uni-greifswald.de/bioinf/braker/RNAseq.bam>)

-   `RNAseq.hints` - RNA-Seq hints (can be used instead of RNAseq.bam as
    RNA-Seq input to BRAKER2)

-   `prot.fa` - protein sequences of close homology in fasta format

-   `ep.hints` - protein hints of remote homology in gff format

Testing BRAKER2 is time consuming because a full test requires the
assembly of sufficient training data and subsequent training of gene
predictors. Consider running BRAKER2 threaded (e.g. `–cores=8`) for
testing. You can also select the `–skipOptimize` option for all tests
that include training of AUGUSTUS in order to speed up testing.

The below given commands assume that you configured all paths to tools
by exporting bash variables.

The example data set also contains scripts `tests/test*.sh` that will
execute below listed commands for testing BRAKER2 with the example data
set. You find example results of AUGUSTUS and GeneMark-EX in the folder
`results/test*`. Be aware that BRAKER2 contains several parts where
random variables are used, i.e. results that you obtain when running the
tests must not be exactly identical.

We give runtime estimations derived from computing on a single core
*Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-7700K CPU @ 4.20GHz*.

Testing BRAKER2 with RNA-Seq (only) data (`test1.sh`)
-----------------------------------------------------

The following command will test the pipeline according to figure
\[braker-main-b\]:

    braker.pl --genome=genome.fa --bam=RNAseq.bam \
       --softmasking

Runtime of this command is $\sim$ 185 minutes.

Testing BRAKER2 with hints from proteins of remote homology (only) (`test2.sh`)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The following command will test the pipeline according to figure
\[braker-main-c\]:

    braker.pl --genome=genome.fa --hints=ep.hints \
       --epmode --softmasking

Runtime of this command is $\sim$ 275 minutes.

Testing BRAKER2 with hints from proteins of remote homology and RNA-Seq (`test3.sh`)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The following command will test a pipeline that first trains
GeneMark-ETP with protein and RNA-Seq hints and subsequently trains
AUGUSTUS on the basis of GeneMark-ETP predictions. AUGUSTUS predictions
are also performed with hints from both sources.

    braker.pl --genome=genome.fa --hints=ep.hints \
       --bam=RNAseq.bam --etpmode --softmasking

Runtime of this command is $\sim$ 380 minutes.

Testing BRAKER2 with proteins of close homology (only) (`test4.sh`)
-------------------------------------------------------------------

The following command will test the pipeline according to figure
\[braker2-sidetrack-b\]:

    braker.pl --genome=genome.fa --prot_seq=prot.fa \
       --prg=gth --trainFromGth --softmasking

Runtime of this command is $\sim$ 137 minutes.

Testing BRAKER2 with proteins of close homology and RNA-Seq data (RNA-Seq supported training) (`test5.sh`)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The following command will test the pipeline according to figure
\[braker2-sidetrack-a\]:

    braker.pl --genome=genome.fa --prot_seq=prot.fa \
       --prg=gth --bam=RNAseq.bam --softmasking

Runtime of this command is $\sim$ 214 minutes.

Testing BRAKER2 with proteins of close homoogy and RNA-Seq data (RNA-Seq and protein supported training) (`test6.sh`
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The following command will test the pipeline according to figure
\[braker2-sidetrack-c\]:

    braker.pl --genome=genome.fa --prot_seq=prot.fa \
       --prg=gth --bam=RNAseq.bam --gth2traingenes \
       --softmasking

Runtime of this command is $\sim$ 346 minutes.

Testing BRAKER2 with pre-trained parameters (prediction only) (`test7.sh`)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

The training step of all pipelines can be skipped with the option
`–skipAllTraining`. This means, only AUGUSTUS predictions will be
performed, using pre-trained, already existing parameters. For example,
you can predict genes with the command:

    braker.pl --genome=genome.fa --bam=RNAseq.bam \
       --species=fly --skipAllTraining --softmasking

Runtime of this command is $\sim$ 54 minutes.

Testing BRAKER2 with genome sequence, only (`text8.sh`)
-------------------------------------------------------

Call:

    braker.pl --genome=genome.fa --esmode --softmasking

Runtime of this command is $\sim$ 606 minutes.

Bug reporting
=============

Before reporting bugs, please check that you are using the most recent
versions of AUGUSTUS and BRAKER. Also, check the list of *Common
Problems* (see section \[commonproblems\]), before reporting bugs.

Reporting bugs on github
------------------------

If you found a bug, please open an issue at
<https://github.com/Gaius-Augustus/BRAKER/issues> (or contact
katharina.hoff@uni-greifswald.de).

Information worth mentioning in your bug report:

Check in `braker/yourSpecies/braker.log` at which step `braker.pl`
crashed.

There are a number of other files that might be of interest, depending
on where in the pipeline the problem occured. Some of the following
files will not be present if they did not contain any errors.

-   `braker/yourSpecies/errors/bam2hints.*.stderr` - will give details
    on a bam2hints crash (step for converting bam file to intron gff
    file)

-   `braker/yourSpecies/hintsfile.gff` - is this file empty? If yes,
    something went wrong during hints generation - does this file
    contain hints from source “b2h” and of type “intron”? If not:
    GeneMark-ET will not be able to execute properly.

-   `braker/yourSpecies/startAlign.stderr` - if you provided a protein
    fasta file and this file is not empty, something went wrong during
    protein alignment

-   `braker/yourSpecies/startAlign.stdout` - may give clues on at which
    point protein alignment went wrong

-   `braker/yourSpecies/(align_gthalign_exoneratealign_spaln)/*err` -
    errors reported by the alignment tools gth/exonerate/spaln

-   `braker/yourSpecies/errors/GeneMark-ET.stderr` - errors reported by
    GeneMark-ET

-   `braker/yourSpecies/errors/GeneMark-ET.stdout` - may give clues
    about the point at which errors in GeneMark-ET occured

-   `braker/yourSpecies/GeneMark-ET/genemark.gtf` - is this file empty?
    If yes, something went wrong during executing GeneMark-ET

-   `braker/yourSpecies/GeneMark-ET/genemark.f.good.gtf` - is this file
    empty? If yes, something went wrong during filtering GeneMark-ET
    genes for training AUGUSTUS

-   `braker/yourSpecies/genbank.good.gb` - try a “grep -c LOCUS
    genbank.good.gb” to determine the number of training genes for
    training AUGUSTUS, should not be low

-   `braker/yourSpecies/errors/firstetraining.stderr` - contains errors
    from first iteration of training AUGUSTUS

-   `braker/yourSpecies/errors/secondetraining.stderr` - contains errors
    from second iteration of training AUGUSTUS

-   `braker/yourSpecies/errors/optimize_augustus.stderr` - contains
    errors optimize\_augustus.pl (additional training set for AUGUSTUS)

-   `braker/yourSpecies/errors/augustus*.stderr` - contain AUGUSTUS
    execution errors

Common problems {#commonproblems}
---------------

-   *BRAKER complains that the RNA-Seq file does not correspond to the
    provided genome file, but I am sure the files correspond to each
    other!*\
    Please check the headers of the genome FASTA file. If the headers
    are long and contain whitespaces, some RNA-Seq alignment tools will
    truncate sequence names in the BAM file. This leads to an error with
    BRAKER. Solution: shorten/simplify FASTA headers in the genome file
    before running the RNA-Seq alignment and BRAKER.

-   *There are duplicate Loci in the `train.gb` file (after using
    GenomeThreader)!*\
    This issue arises if outdated versions of AUGUSTUS and BRAKER are
    used. Solution: Please update AUGUSTUS and BRAKER from github
    (<https://github.com/Gaius-Augustus/Augustus>,
    <https://github.com/Gaius-Augustus/BRAKER>).

Citing BRAKER2 and software called by BRAKER2
=============================================

Since BRAKER2 is a pipeline that calls several Bioinformatics tools,
publication of results obtained by BRAKER2 requires that not only
BRAKER2 is cited, but also the tools that are called by BRAKER2:

-   Always cite and :

    -   Hoff, K.J., Lange, S., Lomsadze, A., Borodovsky, M. and
        Stanke, M. (2015). BRAKER1: unsupervised RNA-Seq-based genome
        annotation with GeneMark-ET and AUGUSTUS. Bioinformatics,
        32(5):767-769.

    -   Stanke, M., Diekhans, M., Baertsch, R. and Haussler, D. (2008).
        Using native and syntenically mapped cDNA alignments to improve
        de novo gene finding. Bioinformatics, doi:
        10.1093/bioinformatics/btn013.

    -   Stanke. M., Schöffmann, O., Morgenstern, B. and Waack, S.
        (2006). Gene prediction in eukaryotes with a generalized hidden
        Markov model that uses hints from external sources. BMC
        Bioinformatics 7, 62.

-   If any kind of AUGUSTUS training was performed by BRAKER2, cite :

    -   Altschul, A.F., Gish, W., Miller, W., Myers, E.W. and Lipman,
        D.J. (1990). A basic local alignment search tool. J Mol Biol,
        215:403–410.

    -   Camacho, C., Coulouris, G., Avagyan, V., Ma, N., Papadopoulos,
        J., Bealer, K., and Madden, T.L. (2009). Blast+: architecture
        and applications. BMC bioinformatics, 10(1):421.

-   If BRAKER was executed with a genome file and no extrinsic evidence,
    cite :

    -   Lomsadze, A., Ter-Hovhannisyan, V., Chernoff, Y.O. and
        Borodovsky, M. (2005). Gene identification in novel eukaryotic
        genomes by self-training algorithm. Nucleic Acids Research,
        33(20):6494–6506.

    -   Ter-Hovhannisyan, V., Lomsadze, A., Chernoff, Y.O. and
        Borodovsky, M. (2008). Gene prediction in novel fungal genomes
        using an ab initio algorithm with unsupervised training. Genome
        research, pages gr–081612, 2008.

-   If BRAKER was executed with RNA-Seq information or with information
    from proteins of remote homology, cite :

    -   Lomsadze, A., Burns, P.D. and Borodovsky, M. (2014). Integration
        of mapped RNA-Seq reads into automatic training of eukaryotic
        gene finding algorithm. Nucleic Acids Research, 42(15):e119.

-   If BRAKER was executed with RNA-Seq alignments in bam-format, cite
    and:

    -   Li, H., Handsaker, B., Wysoker, A., Fennell, T., Ruan, J.,
        Homer, N., Marth, G., Abecasis, G., Durbin, R.; 1000 Genome
        Project Data Processing Subgroup (2009). The Sequence
        Alignment/Map format and SAMtools. Bioinformatics,
        25(16):2078-9.

    -   Barnett, D.W., Garrison, E.K., Quinlan, A.R., Strömberg, M.P.
        and Marth G.T. (2011). BamTools: a C++ API and toolkit for
        analyzing and managing BAM files. Bioinformatics, 27(12):1691-2

-   If BRAKER was executed with proteins of closely related species,
    cite :

    -   Gremme, G. (2013). Computational Gene Structure Prediction. PhD
        thesis, Universität Hamburg.

Licence
=======

All source code, i.e. `scripts/*.pl` or `scripts/*.py` are under the
Artistic License (see
<http://www.opensource.org/licenses/artistic-license.php>).

<div id="refs" class="references">

<div id="ref-Altschul:1990">

Altschul, S.F., W. Gish, W. Miller, E.W. Myers, and D.J. Lipman. 1990.
“Basic Local Alignment Search Tool.” *Journal of Molecular Biology* 215:
403–10.

</div>

<div id="ref-barnett2011bamtools">

Barnett, Derek W, Erik K Garrison, Aaron R Quinlan, Michael P Strömberg,
and Gabor T Marth. 2011. “BamTools: A C++ Api and Toolkit for Analyzing
and Managing Bam Files.” *Bioinformatics* 27 (12). Oxford University
Press: 1691–2.

</div>

<div id="ref-gotoh2008space">

Gotoh, Osamu. 2008a. “A Space-Efficient and Accurate Method for Mapping
and Aligning cDNA Sequences onto Genomic Sequence.” *Nucleic Acids
Research* 36 (8). Oxford University Press: 2630–8.

</div>

<div id="ref-gotoh2008direct">

———. 2008b. “Direct Mapping and Alignment of Protein Sequences onto
Genomic Sequence.” *Bioinformatics* 24 (21). Oxford University Press:
2438–44.

</div>

<div id="ref-gremme2013">

Gremme, G. 2013. “Computational Gene Structure Prediction.” PhD thesis,
Universität Hamburg.

</div>

<div id="ref-braker1">

Hoff, Katharina J, Simone Lange, Alexandre Lomsadze, Mark Borodovsky,
and Mario Stanke. 2015. “BRAKER1: Unsupervised Rna-Seq-Based Genome
Annotation with Genemark-et and Augustus.” *Bioinformatics* 32 (5).
Oxford University Press: 767–69.

</div>

<div id="ref-iwata2012benchmarking">

Iwata, Hiroaki, and Osamu Gotoh. 2012. “Benchmarking Spliced Alignment
Programs Including Spaln2, an Extended Version of Spaln That
Incorporates Additional Species-Specific Features.” *Nucleic Acids
Research* 40 (20). Oxford University Press: e161–e161.

</div>

<div id="ref-li2009sequence">

Li, Heng, Bob Handsaker, Alec Wysoker, Tim Fennell, Jue Ruan, Nils
Homer, Gabor Marth, Goncalo Abecasis, and Richard Durbin. 2009. “The
Sequence Alignment/Map Format and Samtools.” *Bioinformatics* 25 (16).
Oxford University Press: 2078–9.

</div>

<div id="ref-AlexandreLomsadze11282005">

Lomsadze, A., V. Ter-Hovhannisyan, Y.O. Chernoff, and M. Borodovsky.
2005. “Gene identification in novel eukaryotic genomes by self-training
algorithm.” *Nucleic Acids Research* 33 (20): 6494–6506.
doi:[10.1093/nar/gki937](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gki937).

</div>

<div id="ref-GeneMark-ET">

Lomsadze, Alexandre, Paul D Burns, and Mark Borodovsky. 2014.
“Integration of Mapped Rna-Seq Reads into Automatic Training of
Eukaryotic Gene Finding Algorithm.” *Nucleic Acids Research* 42 (15).
Oxford University Press: e119–e119.

</div>

<div id="ref-slater2005automated">

Slater, Guy St C, and Ewan Birney. 2005. “Automated Generation of
Heuristics for Biological Sequence Comparison.” *BMC Bioinformatics* 6
(1). BioMed Central: 31.

</div>

<div id="ref-AUGUSTUS">

Stanke, Mario, Mark Diekhans, Robert Baertsch, and David Haussler. 2008.
“Using Native and Syntenically Mapped cDNA Alignments to Improve de Novo
Gene Finding.” *Bioinformatics* 24 (5). Oxford University Press: 637–44.

</div>

<div id="ref-stanke2006gene">

Stanke, Mario, Oliver Schöffmann, Burkhard Morgenstern, and Stephan
Waack. 2006. “Gene Prediction in Eukaryotes with a Generalized Hidden
Markov Model That Uses Hints from External Sources.” *BMC
Bioinformatics* 7 (1). BioMed Central: 62.

</div>

<div id="ref-ter2008gene">

Ter-Hovhannisyan, Vardges, Alexandre Lomsadze, Yury O Chernoff, and Mark
Borodovsky. 2008. “Gene Prediction in Novel Fungal Genomes Using an Ab
Initio Algorithm with Unsupervised Training.” *Genome Research*. Cold
Spring Harbor Lab, gr–081612.

</div>

</div>

[^1]: EX = ES/ET/EP/ETP, all available for download under the name
    *GeneMark-ES/ET*

[^2]: EX=ES/ET/EP

[^3]: Please use the latest version of AUGUSTUS distributed by the
    original developers, it is available from github at
    <https://github.com/Gaius-Augustus/Augustus>. Problems have been
    reported from users that tried to run BRAKER with AUGUSTUS releases
    maintained by third parties, i.e. Bioconda.

[^4]: Not tested in this release, we recommend using GenomeThreader,
    instead

[^5]: Not tested in this release, we recommend using GenomeThreader,
    instead

[^6]: install with `sudo apt-get install cpanminus`

[^7]: EX=ES/ET/EP/ETP, available as *GeneMark-ES/ET*

[^8]: GeneMark-EX is not a mandatory tool if AUGUSTUS is to be trained
    from GenomeThreader aligments with the option `–trainFromGth`.

[^9]: The binary may e.g. reside in bamtools/build/src/toolkit
